---
id: 1741284479-UMIC
aliases:
  - 003. Learn
tags: []
---

# 003. Learn

- What is system design?
  - System design is the process of defining components and their integration, APIs, and data models to build large-scale systems that meet a specified set of functional and non-functional requirements.
  - System design uses the concepts of computer networking, parallel computing, and distributed systems to craft systems that scale well and are performant
  - System design aims to build systems that are reliable, effective, and maintainable, among other characteristics.
    - Reliable systems handle faults, failures, and errors.
    - Effective systems meet all user needs and business requirements.
    - Maintainable systems are flexible and easy to scale up or down. The ability to add new features also comes under the umbrella of maintainability.

- What is abstraction?
  - Abstraction is the art of obfuscating details that we don’t need. It allows us to concentrate on the big picture.

- Database abstractions
  - Transactions is a database abstraction that hides many problematic outcomes when concurrent users are reading, writing, or mutating the data and gives a simple interface of commit, in case of success, or abort, in case of failure

- What is RPC?
  - RPC is an interprocess communication protocol that’s widely used in distributed systems. In the OSI model of network communication, RPC spans the transport and application layers.

- What is consistency?
  - In distributed systems, consistency may mean many things. One is that each replica node has the same view of data at a given point in time. The other is that each read request gets the value of the recent write. These are not the only definitions of consistency, since there are many forms of consistency. Normally, consistency models provide us with abstractions to reason about the correctness of a distributed system doing concurrent data reads, writes, and mutations.

- There is a difference between consistency in ACID properties and consistency in the CAP theorem.
  - Database rules are at the heart of ACID consistency. If a schema specifies that a value must be unique, a consistent system will ensure that the value is unique throughout all actions. If a foreign key indicates that deleting one row will also delete associated rows, a consistent system ensures that the state can’t contain related rows once the base row has been destroyed.
  - CAP consistency guarantees that, in a distributed system, every replica of the same logical value has the same precise value at all times. It’s worth noting that this is a logical rather than a physical guarantee. Due to the speed of light, replicating numbers throughout a cluster may take some time. By preventing clients from accessing different values at separate nodes, the cluster can nevertheless give a logical picture.

- What is eventual consistency?
  - Eventual consistency is the weakest consistency model. The applications that don’t have strict ordering requirements and don’t require reads to return the latest write choose this model. Eventual consistency ensures that all the replicas will eventually return the same value to the read request, but the returned value isn’t meant to be the latest value. However, the value will finally reach its latest state.
  - Eventual consistency ensures high availability.
  - Example
    - The domain name system is a highly available system that enables name lookups to a hundred million devices across the Internet. It uses an eventual consistency model and doesn’t necessarily reflect the latest values.
  - Note: Cassandra is a highly available NoSQL database that provides eventual consistency.

- What is causal consistency?
  - Causal consistency works by categorizing operations into dependent and independent operations. Dependent operations are also called causally-related operations. Causal consistency preserves the order of the causally-related operations.
  - This model doesn’t ensure ordering for the operations that are not causally related. These operations can be seen in different possible orders.
  - Causal consistency is weaker overall, but stronger than the eventual consistency model. It’s used to prevent non-intuitive behaviors.
  - Example
    - The causal consistency model is used in a commenting system. For example, for the replies to a comment on a Facebook post, we want to display comments after the comment it replies to. This is because there is a cause-and-effect relationship between a comment and its replies.
