---
id: 1742995817-KWZS
aliases:
  - DNS Hierarchy
tags:
  - System Design
---

# DNS Hierarchy

- As stated before, the DNS isn’t a single server that accepts requests and responds to user queries. It’s a complete infrastructure with name servers at different hierarchies.
  - [[1743046062-GPBJ|Name servers]]

- Iterative versus recursive query resolution
  - There are two ways to perform a DNS query:
    - Iterative: The local server requests the root, TLD, and the authoritative servers for the IP address.
    - Recursive: The end user requests the local server. The local server further requests the root DNS name servers. The root name servers forward the requests to other name servers.
  - In the following illustration (on the left), DNS query resolution is iterative from the perspective of the local/ISP server:
  [Iterative versus recursive query](../../assets/imgs/interactive-recursive-query.png)

- Caching
  - Caching refers to the temporary storage of frequently requested [[1743047665-AJID|resource records]]. A record is a data unit within the DNS database that shows a name-to-value binding. Caching reduces response time to the user and decreases network traffic. When we use caching at different hierarchies, it can reduce a lot of querying burden on the DNS infrastructure. Caching can be implemented in the browser, operating systems, local name server within the user’s network, or the ISP’s DNS resolvers.

- DNS as a distributed system#

Although the DNS hierarchy facilitates the distributed Internet that we know today, it’s a distributed system itself. The distributed nature of DNS has the following advantages:

    It avoids becoming a single point of failure (SPOF).
    It achieves low query latency so users can get responses from nearby servers.
    It gets a higher degree of flexibility during maintenance and updates or upgrades. For example, if one DNS server is down or overburdened, another DNS server can respond to user queries.

There are 13 logical root name servers (named letter A through M) with many instances spread throughout the globe. These servers are managed by 12 different organizations.

Let’s now go over how DNS is scalable, reliable, and consistent.
Highly scalable#

Due to its hierarchical nature, DNS is a highly scalable system. Roughly 1,000 replicated instances of 13 root-level servers are spread throughout the world strategically to handle user queries. The working labor is divided among TLD and root servers to handle a query and, finally, the authoritative servers that are managed by the organizations themselves to make the entire system work. As shown in the DNS hierarchy tree above, different services handle different portions of the tree enabling scalability and manageability of the system.
Reliable#

Three main reasons make the DNS a reliable system:

    Caching: The caching is done in the browser, the operating system, and the local name server, and the ISP DNS resolvers also maintain a rich cache of frequently visited services. Even if some DNS servers are temporarily down, cached records can be served to make DNS a reliable system.
    Server replication: DNS has replicated copies of each logical server spread systematically across the globe to entertain user requests at low latency. The redundant servers improve the reliability of the overall system.
    Protocol: Although many clients use DNS over unreliable user datagram protocol (UDP), UDP has its advantages. UDP is much faster and, therefore, improves DNS performance. Furthermore, Internet service’s reliability has improved since its inception, so UDP is usually favored over TCP. A DNS resolver can resend the UDP request if it didn’t get a reply to a previous one. This request-response needs just one round trip, which provides a shorter delay as compared to TCP, which needs a three-way handshake before data exchange.
