---
id: 1742261934-RPDA
aliases:
  - Maintainability
tags:
  - System Design
---

# Maintainability

- What is maintainability?
  - Besides building a system, one of the main tasks afterward is keeping the system up and running by finding and fixing bugs, adding new functionalities, keeping the system’s platform updated, and ensuring smooth system operations.

- We can further divide the concept of maintainability into three underlying aspects:
  - Operability: This is the ease with which we can ensure the system’s smooth operational running under normal circumstances and achieve normal conditions under a fault.
  - Lucidity: This refers to the simplicity of the code. The simpler the code base, the easier it is to understand and maintain it, and vice versa.
  - Modifiability: This is the capability of the system to integrate modified, new, and unforeseen features without any hassle.

- Measuring maintainability
  - Maintainability, *M*, is the probability that the service will restore its functions within a specified time of fault occurrence. M measures how conveniently and swiftly the service regains its normal operating conditions.
  - For example, suppose a component has a defined maintainability value of 95% for half an hour. In that case, the probability of restoring the component to its fully active form in half an hour is 0.95.
  We use (mean time to repair) MTTR as the metric to measure *M*.
  - MTTR=Total Maintenance Time/Total Number of Repairs

- Maintainability and reliability
  - Maintainability can be defined more clearly in close relation to reliability.
  - The only difference between them is the variable of interest.
    - Maintainability refers to *time-to-repair*, whereas reliability refers to both *time-to-repair* and the *time-to-failure*. Combining maintainability and reliability analysis can help us achieve availability, downtime, and uptime insights.
