---
id: 1742473546-XOTH
aliases:
  - Put Back-of-the-envelope Numbers in Perspective
tags:
  - System Design
---

# Put Back-of-the-envelope Numbers in Perspective

- Why do we use back-of-the-envelope calculations?

  - A distributed system has compute nodes connected via a network. There’s a wide variety of available compute nodes and they can be connected in many different ways. Back-of-the-envelope calculations help us ignore the nitty-gritty details of the system (at least at the design level) and focus on more important aspects.

- Some examples of a back-of-the-envelope calculation could be:
  - The number of concurrent TCP connections a server can support.
  - The number of requests per second (RPS) a web, database, or cache server can handle.
  - The storage requirements of a service.

- Choosing an unreasonable number for such calculations can lead to a flawed design. Since we need good estimations in many design problems, we’ll discuss all the relevant concepts in detail in this lesson. These concepts include:
  - The types of data center servers.
  - The realistic access latencies of different components.
  - The estimation of RPS that a server can handle.
  - Examples of bandwidth, servers, and storage estimation.

- Types of data center servers
  - Data centers don’t have a single type of server. Enterprise solutions use commodity hardware to save cost and develop scalable solutions. Below, we discuss the types of servers that are commonly used within a data center to handle different workloads.
