---
id: 1743609151-FGHT
aliases:
  - Algorithms of load balancers
tags:
  - System Design
  - Load Balancer
---

# Algorithms of load balancers

- Load balancers distribute client requests according to an algorithm. Some well-known algorithms are given below:
  - Round-robin scheduling: In this algorithm, each request is forwarded to a server in the pool in a repeating sequential manner.
  - Weighted round-robin: If some servers have a higher capability of serving clients’ requests, then it’s preferred to use a weighted round-robin algorithm. In a weighted round-robin algorithm, each node is assigned a weight. LBs forward clients’ requests according to the weight of the node. The higher the weight, the higher the number of assignments.
  - Least connections: In certain cases, even if all the servers have the same capacity to serve clients, uneven load on certain servers is still a possibility. For example, some clients may have a request that requires longer to serve. Or some clients may have subsequent requests on the same connection. In that case, we can use algorithms like least connections where newer arriving requests are assigned to servers with fewer existing connections. LBs keep a state of the number and mapping of existing connections in such a scenario. We’ll discuss more about state maintenance later in the lesson.
  - Least response time: In performance-sensitive services, algorithms such as least response time are required. This algorithm ensures that the server with the least response time is requested to serve the clients.
  - IP hash: Some applications provide a different level of service to users based on their IP addresses. In that case, hashing the IP address is performed to assign users’ requests to servers.
  - URL hash: It may be possible that some services within the application are provided by specific servers only. In that case, a client requesting service from a URL is assigned to a certain cluster or set of servers. The URL hashing algorithm is used in those scenarios.

There are other algorithms also, like randomized or weighted least connections algorithms.
